We cannot be loving and compassionate unless at the same time we curb our own harmful impulses and desires.
Our body needs peace of mind and is not suited to agitation. This shows that an appreciation for peace of mind is in our blood.
Friends and enemies do not exist as such; friendship and enmity depend on many factors, of which the primary one is our own mental attitude.
In general I think that anger is a sign of weakness and tolerance a sign of strength.
One may practice religion or not, but so long as we seek happiness and continue to live in society, love and affection are indispensable
Developing love and compassion and reducing anger and spite is a universal activity which requires no faith in any religion whatsoever
I would like to say that the very root of respect for human rights and nonviolence is love and kindness to others
While the mind is untamed it can only cause trouble. If anger, greed or arrogance spring up they will take over the situation.
HHDL reaching out to shake hands with Indian Buddhists at Ganden Monastery in Mundgod, India, February 5th, 2011.  http://twitpic.com/3x14ak
In our daily life, tolerance and patience have great benefits: developing them will allow us to sustain and maintain our presence of mind.
We can't be useful to ourselves unless we're useful to others.
The whole purpose of engaging in the practice of patience is to become stronger in mind, stronger in heart.
It is not enough simply to wish that love and compassion should increase in us, we need to make a sustained effort to cultivate them.
The aim of spiritual and therefore ethical practice is to transform and perfect the individual’s motivation and mental disposition.
Live Audio Webcast: HHDL's teaching from Drepung Monastery in South India, Feb 1-2, 9-11am IndianStandardTime http://dalailama.com/liveweb
HHDL watching students debate during their examinations at Rato Monastery in Mundgod, India, on January 31, 2011.  http://twitpic.com/3v4t8b
Cultivating a close, warm-hearted feeling for others automatically puts our mind at ease.
The more we succeed in training our hearts and minds through cultivating spiritual qualities, the better our ability to cope with adversity.
Live: HHDL's talk Finding Happiness in Troubled Times, Bangalore, India on Jan 30, 2:30-4pm IndianStandardTime http://dalailama.com/liveweb
When we are motivated by wisdom and compassion, the results of our actions benefit everyone.
Genuine love should first be directed at oneself – if we do not love ourselves, how can we love others?
We need a genuine sense of responsibility and a sincere concern for the welfare of others.
Because our own human existence is so dependent on the help of others our need for love lies at the very foundation of our existence.
An affectionate disposition not only makes the mind more peaceful and calm, but it affects our body in a positive way too.
Transcript of the video conference with His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Chinese Activists held on January 4th, 2011. http://bit.ly/gbm2Qm
Mutual respect is the foundation of genuine harmony.
By going beyond your own problems and taking care of others, you gain inner strength, self-confidence, courage, and a greater sense of calm.
With the realization of ones own potential and self-confidence in ones ability, one can build a better world.
Photo of HHDL waving to the audience before his teachings in Sarnath, India, on January 15th, 2011.                http://twitpic.com/3qjsiv
If we have a positive mental attitude, then even when surrounded by hostility, we shall not lack inner peace.
Watch HHDL's talk to westerners attending the teachings in Sarnath, India, on January 13th, 2011. http://youtu.be/H0wIxrxatSE
His Holiness the Dalai Lama offers his condolences to those affected by the floods in Brazil. http://bit.ly/i2xIcB
If we develop a good heart, then whether the field is science, agriculture or politics, since motivation is important these will all improve
His Holiness the Dalai Lama Expresses his Sadness Over the Recent Floods in Queensland, Australia. http://bit.ly/h4sUxB
The purpose of our life needs to be positive. We weren’t born with the purpose of causing trouble, harming others.
It is my fundamental conviction that compassion constitutes a basic aspect of our nature as well as being the foundation of our happiness.
Live: HHDL teaches Shantideva’s Guide and Kamalashila’s Middle Stages from Sarnath, India, on Jan 12-16, 2011. http://dalailama.com/liveweb
We cannot overcome anger and hatred simply by suppressing them. We need to actively cultivate the antidotes: patience and tolerance.
Happiness does not come about only due to external circumstances; it mainly derives from inner attitudes.
Photo of HHDL taking part in his first video conference with 3 prominent Chinese intellectuals on January 4, 2011. http://twitpic.com/3novoy
Essay by HHDL "Countering Stress and Depression" originally published by Hindustan Times, India, on January 3rd, 2011. http://bit.ly/ha5KCn
I feel that the moment you adopt a sense of caring for others, it brings you inner strength.
To increase our altruism, we must motivate ourselves to take into consideration the effects of our actions both in the present and future.
Determination and hope are key factors for a brighter future.
Awareness of impermanence and appreciation of our human potential will give us a sense of urgency that we must use every precious moment.
A skillful, balanced approach is helpful for one's physical and emotional health, and it applies to one's spiritual growth as well.
As I see it, compassion is the essence of a spiritual life.
Optimism in the Face of Adversity, a clip from HHDL's talk with students in Sikkim, India, on December 21, 2010. http://youtu.be/_IjCZhlXxkI
If you want others to be happy, practice compassion. If you want to be happy, practice compassion.
In order to create a happy century, a peaceful century we must promote the concept of dialogue.
It is clear that feelings of love, affection, closeness and compassion bring happiness.
I believe that our underlying or fundamental nature is gentleness, and intelligence is a later development.
I think that cultivating positive mental states like kindness and compassion definitely leads to better psychological health and happiness.
Achieving genuine happiness may require bringing about a transformation in your outlook and way of thinking.
HHDL addresses the Science, Spirituality and Education conference in Sikkim, India on December 20th, 2010. http://youtu.be/ANS7Nc2B2ec
Compassion creates a positive, friendly atmosphere.
I believe a proper use of our time is to serve others if we can or at least refrain from harming them. That is the basis of my philosophy.
Within all beings there is a seed of perfection; but compassion is required to activate that seed inherent in our hearts and minds.
Not only do we inherently possess the potential for compassion but I believe that the basic, underlying nature of human beings is gentleness
At one level, all major religious traditions have the same aim – to transform the individual into a positive being.
HHDL clarifies his statements on retirement during a press meeting in Kalimpong, India, on December 14th, 2010. http://youtu.be/7PIEJfbgQ14
A spiritual practice is a constant battle within, replacing previous negative conditioning or habituation with new positive conditioning.
I don’t think human affection and compassion are just religious concerns; they’re indispensable factors in our day-to-day lives.
If we use favorable circumstances such as good health or wealth to help others, they can be contributory factors to achieving a happier life
Remember that calmness and compassion are an important part of living a fruitful, positive human life.
If you make your best effort to be kinder, nurture compassion, make the world a better place, then you can say 'At least I've done my best’.
Even modern medical researchers have come to the conclusion that peace of mind is vital for good health.
Once you encourage the thought of compassion in your mind, once it becomes active, then your attitude towards others changes automatically.
Looking at the pattern of our existence from birth to death, we can see the way in which we are fundamentally nurtured by other's affection.
I think that ethical behavior is another feature of the kind of inner discipline that leads to a happier existence.
I look at people from a positive angle, seeking positive aspects. This immediately creates a feeling of affinity, a kind of connectedness.
Looking at various means of developing compassion, I think empathy is an important factor: the ability to appreciate others' suffering.
No matter what activity or practice we are pursuing, there isn't anything that isn't made easier through constant familiarity and training.
We must insist on the observation that my right to happiness carries no more weight than others' similar right.
The ultimate factor determining whether we have a healthy mind and a healthy body lies within.
All the major religious traditions carry the message of love, compassion and forgiveness.
Live Webcast: HHDL teaches on "37 Practices of a Bodhisattva" on November 30th, 9-1130am Indian Standard Time. http://dalailama.com/liveweb
Material development only brings us physical comfort; mental development depends on training the mind.
Peace of mind is the basis of a healthy body and a healthy mind; so peace of mind, a calm mind, is very, very important.
A sense of concern for others' well-being brings inner strength and self confidence.
A calm mind helps our human intelligence to assess the situation realistically.
We need to make an effort to develop our inner values, irrespective of whether we are religious or not.
By developing a sense of concern for others' well-being, then no matter what others' attitudes are, you can keep inner peace.
Short video clip of HHDL talking about the importance of compassion in New Delhi, India, on November 19th. http://youtu.be/8ASMcxVdlvk
Certain desires are positive: a desire for happiness; for peace; for a more harmonious and friendlier world.
Watch HHDL speaking at the Mother Teresa Memorial Award Ceremony in New Delhi, India, on November 18th. http://youtu.be/Gv6HRXncTao
The proper use of our intelligence and knowledge is to effect changes from within to develop a good heart.
True compassion brings with it the dispelling of internal tensions, a state of calmness and serenity.
We all must seek and work for a world without nuclear weapons.
Watch HHDL's opening statement at the 11th World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates in Hiroshima, Japan,  Nov. 12th http://youtu.be/BFx_tkAOyso
Every day, when you get up, you can develop a sincere positive motivation: I will utilize this day in a more positive way.
Message from His Holiness the Dalai Lama on the release of Aung San Suu Kyi. http://bit.ly/a3Kx5I
I believe that whether a person follows any religion or not is unimportant, he or she must have a good heart, a warm heart.
As human beings we have intelligence and courage. Provided we use these qualities, we will be able to achieve what we set out to do.
The greater the level of calmness of our mind, the greater our peace of mind, the greater our ability to enjoy a happy and joyful life.
If we have a good heart, a warm heart, warm feelings, we will be happy and satisfied ourselves.
Photos of HHDL's visit to the ancient Buddhist capital of Nara, Japan, on November 8th, 2010. http://bit.ly/dreFcc
In human relations, compassion contributes to promoting peace and harmony.
Photos of HHDL at the Peace Conference for Youth 2010 held in Osaka, Japan, on November 7th. http://bit.ly/b7RThb
Peace of mind, a calm state of mind, is rooted in affection and compassion.
Video of HHDL addressing the 6th International Conference of Tibet Support Groups in Haryana, India on Nov. 5th. http://youtu.be/BLkZvUPtZd8
We need to make a concerted effort to develop compassion; we must use all the events in our daily life to transform out thoughts & behavior.
If you use violence, you may get some temporary satisfaction. But the nature of violence is unpredictable - unexpected results often happen.
Watch: Developing a Healthy Mind - clip from the dialogue with HHDL on November 2nd, 2010 from Dharamsala. http://youtu.be/zw3a4MCZk0U
Together with material development, we need spiritual development so that inner peace and social harmony can be experienced.
I am convinced that everyone can develop a good heart and a sense of universal responsibility with or without religion.
The efforts we make sincerely to transform ourselves spiritually are what make us genuine practitioners.
Anger may bring extra energy, but it eclipses the best part of our brain: its rationality. The energy of anger is almost always unreliable.
Irrespective of doctrinal and other differences, all major world religions are concerned with helping individuals become good human beings.
Unlike physical progress, which is subject to natural restrictions, the qualities of the mind can be developed limitlessly.
Watch: CNN's Hala Gorani interviews HHDL during his visit to Florida. Originally broadcast on October 28th, 2010 http://youtu.be/K-XOd1NBTHs
Living a truly ethical life, putting the needs of others first and providing for their happiness, has tremendous implications for society.
True compassion is impartial and bears with it a feeling of responsibility for the welfare and happiness of others.
A compassionate person creates a warm, relaxed atmosphere of welcome and understanding around him.
Live Webcast: HHDL at University of Miami: The Quest for Happiness in Challenging Times - October 26, 1:30pm EDT http://miami.edu/dalailama/
Live Webcast: HHDL at Florida International University: The Significance of World Religions - October 26, 9:15am EDT http://webcast.fiu.edu/
Watch HHDL as guest editor of the Sunday edition of the Toronto Star newspaper published October 24th, 2010. http://youtu.be/NJSILczM-cs
All individuals are equal in that every one of us instinctively seeks happiness and avoids suffering.
Live: HHDL in Toronto, Mind Training teaching & Long Life Empowerment/Ceremony October 24, 9am-4pm. http://www.dalailamatoronto2010.org/
Compassion belongs to every sphere of activity, including, of course, the workplace.
By studying others’ viewpoints, it is possible for us to discover new and refreshing perspectives on the world – including our own life.
An authentic attitude of compassion doesn't change, even faced with another person's negative behavior.
Watch: HHDL meet with the press at Emory University on October 17th, 2010. http://youtu.be/nd-jaBZYYho
Only the inner protection of patience can keep us from experiencing the turmoil of negative thoughts and emotions.
According to my own experience, the highest level of inner calm comes from the development of love and compassion.
When we ignore the question of the impact our actions have on others' well-being, inevitably we end up hurting them.
HHDL visits Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, on October 17-19. Event and live webcast information at http://dalailama.emory.edu/
I try to treat every person I meet like an old friend, and that gives me a real sensation of happiness.
We must cultivate a universal responsibility toward each other and extend it to the planet that we have to share.
I believe that at all levels of society - family, national, and international - the key to a better, happier world is greater compassion.
HHDL shakes hands with some students who joined in an interactive session in Palo Alto, California on Oct. 13th.   http://twitpic.com/2xhqnk
Live webcast: HHDL at Stanford Univ Conference "Scientific Explorations of Compassion and Altruism" Oct 15, 9am-4pm PDT http://bit.ly/b0D3Ye
If we reserve ethical conduct for those whom we feel close to, we may neglect our responsibilities toward those outside this circle.
Live webcast: HHDL at San Jose, California - the Rathbun Lecture, October 14 at 2-3:30pm PDT. http://bit.ly/aVbpTj
Live webcast: HHDL at Stanford Univ. "The Centrality of Compassion in Human Life and Society" Oct 14 at 9:30-11am PDT http://bit.ly/9uiNtx
Ultimately, the source of happiness and joyfulness is within ourselves.
To my way of thinking, the diversity that exists among the various religious traditions is enormously enriching.
The most important benefit of patience consists in the way it acts as a powerful antidote to the affliction of anger.
Press Statement of His Holiness the Dalai Lama on Liu Xiaobo being awarded the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize. http://bit.ly/a7Qixa
If you have a sincere and open heart, you naturally feel self-worth and confidence, and there is no need to be fearful of others.
Developing a sense of universal responsibility helps us to become sensitive to all others, not just those closest to us.
The quality or purity of any spiritual practice is determined by the individual’s intention and motivation.
The important thing is that our day-to-day life should be meaningful, that our attitude should be positive, happy and warm.
As we all share an identical need for love, it is possible to feel that anyone we meet, in whatever circumstances, is a brother or sister.
Once our mind is more calm and joyful, then our activities can be more effective.
Live Webcast from Dharamsala teachings by HHDL, Oct 4-7, 9:30-11:30am & 1:00-3:00pm IndianStandardTime GMT+5.30 http://dalailama.com/liveweb
Lack of contentment sows the seed of envy and aggressive competitiveness and leads to a culture of excessive materialism.
When we disarm internally by countering negative emotions and cultivating positive qualities, we create conditions for external disarmament.
Compassion is one of the principal things that make our lives meaningful. It is the source of all lasting happiness and joy.
Watch HHDL speak about compassion during the Peace Summit held in Vancouver, Canada, on September 30th, 2009. http://youtu.be/QOd-MYmUoVA
From adversity we can learn the value of patience.
When tragedy or misfortune comes our way, if we can shift our focus away from self and toward others, we experience a freeing effect.
The more we are compassionate, the more we provide for our own happiness.
From the archives: Watch Betty Nguyen of CNN interview HHDL in Florida on February 24th, 2010. http://youtu.be/aRcc8EsthGg
Given human beings' love of truth, justice, peace, and freedom, creating a better, more compassionate world is a genuine possibility.
When we reach beyond the confines of narrow self-interest, our hearts become filled with strength.
Whatever we do for others, whatever sacrifices we make, it should be voluntary and arise from understanding the benefit of such actions.
If we change inside and disarm ourselves by dealing constructively with negative thoughts and emotions, we can literally change the world.
All human endeavor is potentially great and noble - so long as we carry out our work with good motivation.
Mayor Gabor Demsky of Budapest confers Honorary Citizenship upon HHDL on September 18th, 2010. http://twitpic.com/2psrcb
Perhaps the most significant obstruction to inter-religious harmony is a lack of appreciation of the value of others' faith traditions.
Inner happiness is not determined by material circumstances or sensual gratification. It depends on our mind.
It is worth remembering that the time of greatest gain in terms of wisdom and inner strength is often that of greatest difficulty.
Compassion and love constitute non-violence in action.
Cultivating contentment is crucial to maintaining peaceful coexistence.
Images of HHDL's trip to Ladakh to visit flood damaged areas and join in prayers for the victims on September 13th. http://bit.ly/aTUd0D
Through kindness, affection, honesty, truth and justice toward all others we ensure our own benefit – this is a matter of common sense.
Having a good heart and benefiting others are proper attitudes for everyone, whether they are spiritual practitioners or not.
I believe that our every act has a universal dimension.
Watch: HHDL talks about the benefits of a calm mind during his teachings in Dharamsala, India, on September 8th. http://youtu.be/OFn0AX4oZsc
Compassion is the foundation of a good heart, the heart of one who acts out of a desire to help others.
When in our interactions with our neighbors we are open and sincere in everything we say and think and do, people have no need to fear us.
We each have a role to play: genuine, lasting world peace will only be possible as a result of each of us making an effort internally.
Live:HHDL teaches Heart Sutra & 37 Practices, Sept 8-10, 9:30-11:30am & 1:00-3:00pm IndianStandardTime GMT+5.30 http://dalailama.com/liveweb
By being inattentive to the needs of others, inevitably we end up harming them.
Through developing an attitude of responsibility toward others, we can begin to create the kinder, more compassionate world we all dream of.
Ethical discipline is the indispensable means for mediating between the competing claims of my right to happiness and others' equal right.
I am encouraged by the clear acknowledgment of the need to seek non-violent resolutions of conflict in a spirit of reconciliation.
When we are committed to honesty, we help reduce the level of misunderstanding, doubt, and fear throughout society.
In the modern world, the interests of a particular community can no longer be considered to lie within the confines of its own boundaries.
To the extent that suffering awakens our empathy and causes us to connect with others, it can serve as the basis of compassion and love.
Noticing a single shortcoming in ourselves is far more useful than seeing a thousand in someone else. When it is our own: we can correct it.
It is worth saying over and over that ethical discipline entails more than just restraint. It also entails the cultivation of virtue.
Live: HHDL teaches the Diamond Sutra August 28-29, 9:30-11:30am & 1:30-3:30pm IndianStandardTime(GMT+5.30) http://dalailama.com/live-webcast
There must be a way of promoting human values without involving religion, based on common sense, experience and recent scientific findings.
One of the most effective ways to overcome anxiety is to try to shift the focus of attention away from self and toward others.
Above all, we should remember that as long as we retain the capacity of concern for others, the potential for transformation remains.
Watch HDDL meeting with members of the press during his visit to Manali, India, on August 22nd. http://youtu.be/nr1GYL1e3pk
Unfortunate events, though potentially a source of anger and despair, have equal potential to be a source of spiritual growth.
If we have no inner peace, we deceive ourselves into thinking that comfort and prosperity will bring happiness.
Some photos of HHDL's visit to Jispa, a remote region of Himachal Pradesh, India, on August 18-20. http://bit.ly/d0EpdP
You need self-confidence and determination: feeling depressed and losing hope will never really help to correct any situation.
Genuine friends come only on the basis of warm-heartedness.
Peace does not come through prayer, we human beings must create peace.
We find that patience is the best means we have of defending ourselves internally from anger's destructive effects.
Giving is recognized as a virtue in every major religion and in every civilized society, and it clearly benefits both giver and receiver.
Watch: HHDL talks about making our lives meaningful during the dialogue at Delhi University on August 10, 2010. http://youtu.be/j5CZartK_IM
A concerted international effort is needed to think about measures to preserve our common and delicate ecology.
His Holiness the Dalai Lama prays for the loss of life caused by floods in Pakistan, India, and landslides in Drugchu http://bit.ly/aHO6DW
Watch HHDL on secular approach to compassion in a clip from the dialogue at Delhi University on August 10, 2010. http://youtu.be/5pcEvTLAlF0
